# Sonar JSON format output specification

AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED BY `process-doc -doc`.  DO NOT EDIT.
Instead, edit `util/formats/newfmt/types.go`, then in `util/process-doc` run `make install`.

## Introduction

Five types of data are collected:

* job and process sample data
* node sample data
* job data
* node configuration data
* cluster data

The job and process sample data are collected frequently on every node and comprise information
about each running job and the resource use of the processes in the job, for all pertinent
resources (cpu, ram, gpu, gpu ram, power consumption, i/o).

The node sample data are also collected on every node, normally at the same time as the job and
process sample data, and comprise information about the overall use of resources on the node
independently of jobs and processes, to the extent these can't be derived from the job and
process sample data.

The job data are collected on a master node and comprise information about the job that are not
directly related to moment-to-moment resource usage: start and end times, time in the queue,
allocation requests, completion status, billable resource use and so on.  (Only applies to
systems with a job manager / job queue.)

The node configuration data are collected occasionally on every node and comprise information
about the current configuration of the node.

The cluster data are collected occasionally on a master node and comprise information about the
cluster that are related to how nodes are grouped into partitions and short-term node status; it
complements node configuration data.

NOTE: Nodes may be added to clusters simply by submitting data for them.

NOTE: We do not yet collect some interesting cluster configuration data – how nodes, racks,
islands are connected and by what type of interconnect; the type of attached I/O.  Clusters are
added to the database through other APIs.

## Slurm

The motivation for extracting Slurm data is to obtain data about a job that are not apparent
from process samples, notably data about requested resources and wait time, and to store them in
such a way that they can be correlated with samples for queries and for as long as we need them.
Data already obtained by process sampling are not to be gotten from Slurm, including most
performance data and information about resources that are observably used by the job.

The working hypothesis is that:

  - all necessary Slurm data can be extracted from a single node in the cluster, as they only
    include data that Slurm collects and stores for itself
  - the Slurm data collection can be performed by sampling, ie, by running data collection
    periodically using externally available Slurm tools, and not by getting callbacks from Slurm

That does not remove performance constraints, as the Slurm system is already busy and does not
need an extra load from a polling client that runs often.  It does ease performance constraints,
though, as access to the Slurm data store will not impact compute nodes and places a load only
on administrative systems.  Even so, we may not assume that sampling can run very often, as the
data volumes can be quite large.  (`squeue | wc` on fox just now yields 100KB of formatted data.)

In principle, Sonar shall send data about a job at least three times: when the job is created
and enters the PENDING state, when it enters the RUNNING state, and when it has completed (in
any of a number of different states).  At each of those steps, it shall send data that are
available at that time that have not been sent before; this includes data that may have changed
(for example, the Priority may be sent with a PENDING record but if the priority changes later,
it should be sent again the next time a data sample is sent).  In practice, there are two main
complications: Sonar runs as a sampler and may not observe a job in all of those states, and it
may run in a stateless mode in which it will be unable to know whether it has already sent some
information about a job and can avoid sending it again.  (There is a discussion to be had about
other events: priority changes, job suspension, job resize.)

Therefore, the Slurm data that are transmitted must be assumed by the consumer to be both
partial and potentially redundant.  Data in records with later timestamps generally override
data from earlier records.

## Data format overall notes

The output is a tree structure that is constrained enough to be serialized as
[JSON](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259) and other likely serialization formats (protobuf,
bson, cbor, a custom format, whatever).  It shall follow the [json:api
specification](https://jsonapi.org/format/#document-structure).  It generally does not
incorporate many size optimizations.

It's not a goal to have completely normalized data; redundancies are desirable in some cases to
make data self-describing.

In a serialization format that allows fields to be omitted, all fields except union fields will
have default values, which are zero, empty string, false, the empty object, or the empty array.
A union field must have exactly one member present.

Field values are constrained by data types described below, and sometimes by additional
constraints described in prose.  Primitive types are as they are in Go: 64-bit integers and
floating point, and Unicode strings.  Numeric values outside the given ranges, non-Unicode
string encodings, malformed timestamps, malformed node-ranges or type-incorrect data in any
field can cause the entire top-level object containing them to be rejected by the back-end.

The word "current" in the semantics of a field denotes an instantaneous reading or a
short-interval statistical measure; contrast "cumulative", which is since start of process/job
or since system boot or some other fixed time.

Field names generally do not carry unit information.  The units are included in the field
descriptions, but if they are not then they should be kilobytes for memory, megahertz for
clocks, watts for power, and percentage points for relative utilization measures.  (Here,
Kilobyte (KB) = 2^10, Megabyte (MB) = 2^20, Gigabyte (GB) = 2^30 bytes, SI notwithstanding.)

The top-level object for each output data type is the "...Envelope" object.

Within each envelope, `Data` and `Errors` are exclusive of each other.

Within each data object, no json:api `id` field is needed since the monitoring component is a
client in spec terms.

The errors field in an envelope is populated only for hard errors that prevent output from being
produced at all. Soft/recoverable errors are represented in the primary data objects.

MetadataObject and ErrorObject are shared between the various data types, everything else is
specific to the data type and has a name that clearly indicates that.

Some fields present in the older Sonar data are no longer here, having been deemed redundant or
obsolete.  Some are here in a different form.  Therefore, while old and new data are broadly
compatible, there may be some minor problems translating between them.

If a device does not expose a UUID, one will be constructed for it by the monitoring component.
This UUID will never be confusable with another device within the same cluster but it may change,
eg at reboot, creating a larger population of devices than there is in actuality.

## Data format versions

This document describes data format version "0".  Adding fields or removing fields where default
values indicate missing values in the data format do not change the version number: the version
number only needs change if semantics of existing fields change in some incompatible way.  We
intend that the version will "never" change.

## Data types

### Type: `NonemptyString`

String value where an empty value is an error, not simply absence of data

### Type: `NonzeroUint`

Uint64 value where zero is an error, not simply absence of datga

### Type: `Timestamp`

RFC3339 localtime+TZO with no sub-second precision: yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ss+hh:mm, "Z" for +00:00.

### Type: `OptionalTimestamp`

Timestamp, or empty string for missing data

### Type: `Hostname`

Dotted host name or prefix of same, with standard restrictions on character set.

### Type: `ExtendedUint`

An unsigned value that carries two additional values: unset and infinite.  It has a more limited
value range than regular unsigned.  The representation is: 0 for unset, 1 for infinite, and v+2
for all other values v.

### Type: `DataType`

String-valued enum tag for the record type

### Type: `MetadataObject`

Information about the data producer and the data format.  After the data have been ingested, the
metadata can be thrown away and will not affect the data contents.

NOTE: The `attrs` field can be used to transmit information about how the data were collected.
For example, sometimes Sonar is run with switches that exclude system jobs and short-running
jobs, and the data could record this.  For some agents, it may be desirable to report on eg
Python version (slurm-monitor does this).

#### **`producer`** NonemptyString

The name of the component that generated the data (eg "sonar", "slurm-monitor")

#### **`version`** NonemptyString

The semver of the producer

#### **`format`** uint64

The data format version

#### **`attrs`** []KVPair

An array of generator-dependent attribute values

#### **`token`** string

EXPERIMENTAL / UNDERSPECIFIED.  An API token to be used with
Envelope.Data.Attributes.Cluster, it proves that the producer of the datum was authorized to
produce data for that cluster name.

### Type: `ErrorObject`

Information about a continuable or non-continuable error.

#### **`time`** Timestamp

Time when the error was generated

#### **`detail`** NonemptyString

A sensible English-language error message describing the error

#### **`cluster`** Hostname

Canonical cluster name for node generating the error

#### **`node`** Hostname

name of node generating the error

### Type: `KVPair`

Carrier of arbitrary attribute data

#### **`key`** NonemptyString

A unique key within the array for the attribute

#### **`value`** string

Some attribute value

### Type: `SysinfoEnvelope`

The Sysinfo object carries hardware information about a node.

NOTE: "Nodeinfo" would have been a better name but by now "Sysinfo" is baked into everything.

NOTE: Also see notes about envelope objects in the preamble.

NOTE: These are extracted from the node periodically, currently with Sonar we extract
information every 24h and on node boot.

NOTE: In the Go code, the JSON representation can be read with ConsumeJSONSysinfo().

#### **`meta`** MetadataObject

Information about the producer and data format

#### **`data`** *SysinfoData

Node data, for successful probes

#### **`errors`** []ErrorObject

Error information, for unsuccessful probes

### Type: `SysinfoData`

System data, for successful sysinfo probes

#### **`type`** DataType

Data tag: The value "sysinfo"

#### **`attributes`** SysinfoAttributes

The node data themselves

### Type: `SysinfoAttributes`

This object describes a node, its CPUS, devices, topology and software

For the time being, we assume all cores on a node are the same. This is complicated by eg
BIG.little systems (performance cores vs efficiency cores), for one thing, but that's OK.

NOTE: The node may or may not be under control of Slurm or some other batch system.
However, that information is not recorded with the node information, but with the node sample
data, as the node can be added to or removed from a Slurm partition at any time.

NOTE: The number of physical cores is sockets * cores_per_socket.

NOTE: The number of logical cores is sockets * cores_per_socket * threads_per_core.

#### **`time`** Timestamp

Time the current data were obtained

#### **`cluster`** Hostname

The canonical cluster name

#### **`node`** Hostname

The name of the host as it is known to itself

#### **`os_name`** NonemptyString

Operating system name (the `sysname` field of `struct utsname`)

#### **`os_release`** NonemptyString

Operating system version (the `release` field of `struct utsname`)

#### **`architecture`** NonemptyString

Architecture name (the `machine` field of `struct utsname`)

#### **`sockets`** NonzeroUint

Number of CPU sockets

#### **`cores_per_socket`** NonzeroUint

Number of physical cores per socket

#### **`threads_per_core`** NonzeroUint

Number of hyperthreads per physical core

#### **`cpu_model`** string

Manufacturer's model name

#### **`memory`** NonzeroUint

Primary memory in kilobytes

#### **`topo_svg`** string

Base64-encoded text output (SVG source text) of `lstopo` or similar

#### **`topo_text`** string

Base64-encoded text output (human-readable) of `hwloc-ls` or similar

#### **`cards`** []SysinfoGpuCard

Per-card information

#### **`distances`** [][]uint64

Square matrix of standard NUMA node-to-node distances (normalized to 10 for self distance)

### Type: `SysinfoGpuCard`

Per-card information.

NOTE: Many of the string values are idiosyncratic or have card-specific formats, and some are
not available on all cards.

NOTE: Only the UUID, manufacturer, model and architecture are required to be stable over time
(in practice, memory might be stable too).

NOTE: Though the power limit can change, it is reported here (as well as in sample data) because
it usually does not.

#### **`index`** uint64

Local card index, may change at boot

#### **`uuid`** string

UUID as reported by card.  See notes in preamble

#### **`address`** string

Indicates an intra-system card address, eg PCI address

#### **`manufacturer`** string

A keyword, "NVIDIA", "AMD", "Intel" (others TBD)

#### **`model`** string

Card-dependent, this is the manufacturer's model string

#### **`architecture`** string

Card-dependent, for NVIDIA this is "Turing", "Volta" etc

#### **`driver`** string

Card-dependent, the manufacturer's driver string

#### **`firmware`** string

Card-dependent, the manufacturer's firmware string

#### **`memory`** uint64

GPU memory in kilobytes

#### **`power_limit`** uint64

Power limit in watts

#### **`max_power_limit`** uint64

Max power limit in watts

#### **`min_power_limit`** uint64

Min power limit in watts

#### **`max_ce_clock`** uint64

Max clock of compute element

#### **`max_memory_clock`** uint64

Max clock of GPU memory

### Type: `SampleEnvelope`

The "sample" record is sent from each node at each sampling interval in the form of a top-level
sample object.

NOTE: Also see notes about envelope objects in the preamble.

NOTE: JSON representation can be read with ConsumeJSONSamples().

#### **`meta`** MetadataObject

Information about the producer and data format

#### **`data`** *SampleData

Sample data, for successful probes

#### **`errors`** []ErrorObject

Error information, for unsuccessful probes

### Type: `SampleData`

Sample data, for successful sysinfo probes

#### **`type`** DataType

Data tag: The value "sample"

#### **`attributes`** SampleAttributes

The sample data themselves

### Type: `SampleAttributes`

Holds the state of the node and the state of its running processes at a point in time, possibly
filtered.

NOTE: A SampleAttributes object with an empty jobs array represents a heartbeat from an idle
node, or a recoverable error situation if errors is not empty.

#### **`time`** Timestamp

Time the current data were obtained

#### **`cluster`** Hostname

The canonical cluster name whence the datum originated

#### **`node`** Hostname

The name of the node as it is known to the node itself

#### **`system`** SampleSystem

State of the node as a whole

#### **`jobs`** []SampleJob

State of jobs on the nodes

#### **`errors`** []ErrorObject

Recoverable errors, if any

### Type: `SampleSystem`

This object describes the state of the node independently of the jobs running on it.  Generally
these are independent of cgroup or other resource partitioning.

NOTE: Other node-wide fields will be added (e.g. for additional memory measures, for I/O and for
energy).

NOTE: The sysinfo for the node provides the total memory; available memory = total - used.

#### **`cpus`** []SampleCpu

The state of individual cores

#### **`gpus`** []SampleGpu

The state of individual GPU devices

#### **`used_memory`** uint64

The amount of primary memory in use in kilobytes

#### **`load1`** float64

One-minute load average

#### **`load5`** float64

Five-minute load average

#### **`load15`** float64

Fifteen-minute load average

#### **`runnable_entities`** uint64

Number of currently runnable scheduling entities (processes, threads)

#### **`existing_entities`** uint64

Number of currently existing sceduling entities

### Type: `SampleCpu`

The number of CPU seconds used by the core since boot.

### Type: `SampleGpu`

This object exposes utilization figures for the card.

NOTE: In all monitoring data, cards are identified both by current index and by immutable UUID,
this is redundant but hopefully useful.

NOTE: A card index may be local to a job, as Slurm jobs partition the system and may remap cards
to a local name space.  UUID is usually safer.

NOTE: Some fields are available on some cards and not on others.

NOTE: If there are multiple fans and we start caring about that then we can add a new field, eg
"fans", that holds an array of fan speed readings. Similarly, if there are multiple temperature
sensors and we care about that we can introduce a new field to hold an array of readings.

#### **`index`** uint64

Local card index, may change at boot

#### **`uuid`** NonemptyString

Card UUID.  See preamble for notes about UUIDs.

#### **`failing`** uint64

If not zero, an error code indicating a card failure state. code=1 is "generic failure".
Other codes TBD.

#### **`fan`** uint64

Percent of primary fan's max speed, may exceed 100% on some cards in some cases

#### **`compute_mode`** string

Current compute mode, completely card-specific if known at all

#### **`performance_state`** ExtendedUint

Current performance level, card-specific >= 0, or unset for "unknown".

#### **`memory`** uint64

Memory use in Kilobytes

#### **`ce_util`** uint64

Percent of computing element capability used

#### **`memory_util`** uint64

Percent of memory used

#### **`temperature`** int64

Degrees C card temperature at primary sensor (note can be negative)

#### **`power`** uint64

Watts current power usage

#### **`power_limit`** uint64

Watts current power limit

#### **`ce_clock`** uint64

Compute element current clock

#### **`memory_clock`** uint64

memory current clock

### Type: `SampleJob`

Sample data for a single job

NOTE: Information about processes comes from various sources, and not all paths reveal all the
information, hence there is some hedging about what values there can be, eg for user names.

NOTE: The (job,epoch) pair must always be used together. If epoch is 0 then job is never 0 and
other (job,0) records coming from the same or other nodes in the same cluster at the same or
different time denote other aspects of the same job. Slurm jobs will have epoch=0, allowing us
to merge event streams from the job both intra- and inter-node, while non-mergeable jobs will
have epoch not zero. See extensive discussion in the "Rectification" section below.

NOTE: Other job-wide / cross-process / per-slurm-job fields can be added, e.g. for I/O and
energy, but only those that can only be monitored from within the node itself. Job data that can
be extracted from a Slurm master node will be sent with the job data, see later.

NOTE: Process entries can also be created for jobs running in containers. See below for
comments about the data that can be collected.

NOTE: On batch systems there may be more jobs than those managed by the batch system.
These are distinguished by a non-zero epoch, see above.

#### **`job`** uint64

The job ID

#### **`user`** NonemptyString

User name on the cluster; `_user_<uid>` if not determined but user ID is available,
`_user_unknown` otherwise.

#### **`epoch`** uint64

Zero for batch jobs, otherwise is a nonzero value that increases (by some amount) when the
system reboots, and never wraps around. You may think of it as a boot counter for the node,
but you must not assume that the values observed will be densely packed.  See notes.

#### **`processes`** []SampleProcess

Processes in the job, all have the same Job ID.

### Type: `SampleProcess`

Sample values for a single process within a job.

NOTE: Other per-process fields can be added, eg for I/O and energy.

NOTE: Memory utilization, produced by slurm-monitor, can be computed as resident_memory/memory
where resident_memory is the field above and memory is that field in the sysinfo object for the
node or in the slurm data (allocated memory).

NOTE: Resident memory is a complicated figure. What we want is probably the Pss ("Proportional
Set Size") which is private memory + a share of memory shared with other processes but that is
often not available. Then we must choose from just private memory (RssAnon) or private memory +
all resident memory shared with other processes (Rss). The former is problematic because it
undercounts memory, the latter problematic because summing resident memory of the processes will
frequently lead to a number that is more than physical memory as shared memory is counted
several times.

NOTE: Container software may not reveal all the process data we want. Docker, for example,
provides cpu_util but not cpu_avg or cpu_time, and a memory utilization figure from which
resident_memory must be back-computed.

NOTE: The fields cpu_time, cpu_avg, and cpu_util are different views on the same
quantities and are used variously by Sonar and the slurm-monitor dashboard. The Jobanalyzer
back-end computes its own cpu_util from a time series of cpu_time values and using the
cpu_avg as the first value in the computed series. The slurm-monitor dashboard in contrast
uses cpu_util directly, but as it will require some time to perform the sampling it slows down
the monitoring process (a little) and make it more expensive (a little), and the result is less
accurate (it's a sample, not an averaging over the entire interval). Possibly having either
cpu_avg and cpu_time together or cpu_util on its own would be sufficient.

#### **`resident_memory`** uint64

Kilobytes of private resident memory.

#### **`virtual_memory`** uint64

Kilobytes of virtual data+stack memory

#### **`cmd`** string

The command (not the command line), zombie processes get an extra <defunct> annotation at
the end, a la ps.

#### **`pid`** uint64

Process ID, zero is used for rolled-up samples (see below at "Rolledup").

#### **`ppid`** uint64

Parent-process ID.

#### **`num_threads`** uint64

The number of threads in the process, minus 1 - we don't count the process's main thread
(allowing this fields to be omitted in transmission for most processes).

#### **`cpu_avg`** float64

The running average CPU percentage over the true lifetime of the process as reported
by the operating system. 100.0 corresponds to "one full core's worth of computation".
See notes.

#### **`cpu_util`** float64

The current sampled CPU utilization of the process, 100.0 corresponds to "one full core's
worth of computation". See notes.

#### **`cpu_time`** uint64

Cumulative CPU time in seconds for the process over its lifetime. See notes.

#### **`data_read`** uint64

Kilobytes read with all sorts of read calls (rounded up).

#### **`data_written`** uint64

Kilobytes written with all sorts of write calls (rounded up).

#### **`data_cancelled`** uint64

Kilobytes written but never flushed to physical media (i.e., held in RAM but then made
obsolete by overwriting or file deletion or similar) (rounded up).

#### **`rolledup`** int

The number of additional samples for processes that are "the same" that have been rolled into
this one. That is, if the value is 1, the record represents the sum of the sample data for
two processes.  See postamble for more.

#### **`gpus`** []SampleProcessGpu

GPU sample data for all cards used by the process.

### Type: `SampleProcessGpu`

Per-process per-gpu sample data.

NOTE: The difference between gpu_memory and gpu_memory_util is that, on some cards some of the
time, it is possible to determine one of these but not the other, and vice versa. For example,
on the NVIDIA cards we can read both quantities for running processes but only gpu_memory for
some zombies. On the other hand, on our AMD cards there used to be no support for detecting the
absolute amount of memory used, nor the total amount of memory on the cards, only the percentage
of gpu memory used (gpu_memory_util). Sometimes we can convert one figure to another, but other
times we cannot quite do that. Rather than encoding the logic for dealing with this in the
monitoring component, the task is currently offloaded to the back end. It would be good to clean
this up, with experience from more GPU types too - maybe gpu_memory_util can be removed.

NOTE: Some cards do not reveal the amount of compute or memory per card per process, only which
cards and how much compute or memory in aggregate (NVIDIA at least provides the more detailed
data). In that case, the data revealed here for each card will be the aggregate figure for the
process divided by the number of cards the process is running on.

#### **`index`** uint64

Local card index, may change at boot

#### **`uuid`** NonemptyString

Card UUID.  See preamble for notes about UUIDs.

#### **`gpu_util`** float64

The current GPU percentage utilization for the process on the card.

(The "gpu_" prefix here and below is sort of redundant but have been retained since it makes
the fields analogous to the "cpu_" fields.)

#### **`gpu_memory`** uint64

The current GPU memory used in kilobytes for the process on the card. See notes.

#### **`gpu_memory_util`** float64

The current GPU memory usage percentage for the process on the card. See notes.

### Type: `JobsEnvelope`

Jobs data are extracted from a single always-up master node on the cluster, and describe jobs
under the control of a central jobs manager.

NOTE: A stateful client can filter the data effectively.  Minimally it can filter against an
in-memory database of job records and the state or fields that have been sent.  The backend must
still be prepared to deal with redundant data as the client might crash and be resurrected, but
we can still keep data volume down.

JSON representation can be read with ConsumeJSONJobs().

#### **`meta`** MetadataObject

Information about the producer and data format

#### **`data`** *JobsData

Jobs data, for successful probes

#### **`errors`** []ErrorObject

Error information, for unsuccessful probes

### Type: `JobsData`

Jobs data, for successful jobs probes

#### **`type`** DataType

Data tag: The value "jobs"

#### **`attributes`** JobsAttributes

The jobs data themselves

### Type: `JobsAttributes`

A collection of jobs

NOTE: There can eventually be other types of jobs, there will be other fields for them here, and
the decoder will populate the correct field.  Other fields will be nil.

#### **`time`** Timestamp

Time the current data were obtained

#### **`cluster`** Hostname

The canonical cluster name

#### **`slurm_jobs`** []SlurmJob

Individual job records.  There may be multiple records per job, one per job step.

### Type: `SlurmJob`

See extensive discussion in the postamble for what motivates the following spec.  In particular,
Job IDs are very complicated.

Fields below mostly carry names and semantics from the Slurm REST API, except where those names
or semantics are unworkable.  (For example, the name field really needs to be job_name.)

NOTE: Fields with substructure (AllocTRES, GRESDetail) may have parsers, see other files in this
package.

NOTE: There may be various ways of getting the data: sacct, scontrol, slurmrestd, or talking to
the database directly.

NOTE: References to "slurm" for the fields below are to the Slurm REST API specification.  That
API is poorly documented and everything here is subject to change.

NOTE: The first four fields, job_id, job_step, job_name, and job_state must be transmitted in
every record.  Other fields depend on the nature and state of the job.  Every field should be
transmitted with the first record for the step that is sent after the field acquires a value.

#### **`job_id`** NonzeroUint

The Slurm Job ID that directly controls the task that the record describes, in an array or
het job this is the primitive ID of the subjob.

sacct: the part of `JobIDRaw` before the separator (".", "_", "+").

slurm: `JOB_INFO.job_id`.

#### **`job_step`** string

The step identifier for the job identified by job_id.  For the topmost step/stage of a job
this will be the empty string.  Other values normally have the syntax of unsigned integers,
but may also be the strings "extern" and "batch".  This field's default value is the empty
string.

NOTE: step 0 and step "empty string" are different, in fact thinking of a normal number-like
step name as a number may not be very helpful.

sacct: the part of `JobIDRaw` after the separator.

slurm: via jobs: `Job.STEP_STEP.name`, probably.

#### **`job_name`** string

The name of the job.

sacct: `JobName`.

slurm: `JOB_INFO.name`.

#### **`job_state`** NonemptyString

The state of the job described by the record, an all-uppercase word from the set PENDING,
RUNNING, CANCELLED, COMPLETED, DEADLINE, FAILED, OUT_OF_MEMORY, TIMEOUT.

sacct: `State`, though sometimes there's additional information in the output that we will
discard ("CANCELLED by nnn").

slurm: `JOB_STATE.current` probably, though that has multiple values.

#### **`array_job_id`** uint64

The overarching ID of an array job, see discussion in the postamble.

sacct: the n of a `JobID` of the form `n_m.s`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.array_job_id`.

#### **`array_task_id`** uint64

if `array_job_id` is not zero, the array element's index.  Individual elements of an array
job have their own plain job_id; the `array_job_id` identifies these as part of the same array
job and the array_task_id identifies their position within the array, see later discussion.

sacct: the m of a `JobID` of the form `n_m.s`.

slurm: `JOB_INFO.array_task_id`.

#### **`het_job_id`** uint64

If not zero, the overarching ID of a heterogenous job.

sacct: the n of a `JobID` of the form `n+m.s`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.het_job_id`

#### **`het_job_offset`** uint64

If `het_job_id` is not zero, the het job element's index.

sacct: the m of a `JobID` of the form `n+m.s`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.het_job_offset`.

#### **`user_name`** string

The name of the user running the job.  Important for tracking resources by user.

sacct: `User`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.user_name`

#### **`account`** string

The name of the user's account.  Important for tracking resources by account.

sacct: `Account`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.account`

#### **`submit_time`** Timestamp

The time the job was submitted.

sacct: `Submit`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.submit_time`

#### **`time_limit`** ExtendedUint

The time limit in minutes for the job.

sacct: `TimelimitRaw`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.time_limit`

#### **`partition`** string

The name of the partition to use.

sacct: `Partition`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.partiton`

#### **`reservation`** string

The name of the reservation.

sacct: `Reservation`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.resv_name`

#### **`nodes`** []string

The nodes allocated to the job or step.

sacct: `NodeList`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.nodes`

#### **`priority`** ExtendedUint

The job priority.

sacct: `Priority`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.priority`

#### **`distribution`** string

Requested layout.

sacct: `Layout`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.steps[i].task.distribution`

#### **`gres_detail`** []string

Requested resources. For running jobs, the data can in part be synthesized from process
samples: we'll know the resources that are being used.

sacct: TBD - TODO (possibly unavailable or maybe only when RUNNING).

slurm: `JOB_INFO.gres_detail`

#### **`requested_cpus`** uint64

Number of requested CPUs.

sacct: `ReqCPUS`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.cpus`

TODO: Is this per node?  If so, change the name of the field.

#### **`minimum_cpus_per_node`** uint64

TODO: Description.  This may be the same as requested_cpus?

sacct: TODO - TBD.

slurm: `JOB_INFO.minimum_cpus_per_node`

#### **`requested_memory_per_node`** uint64

Amount of requested memory in kilobytes.

sacct: `ReqMem`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.memory_per_node`

#### **`requested_node_count`** uint64

Number of requested nodes.

sacct: `ReqNodes`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.node_count`

#### **`start_time`** Timestamp

Time the job started, if started

sacct: `Start`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.start_time`

#### **`suspend_time`** uint64

Number of seconds the job was suspended

sacct: `Suspended`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.suspend_time`

#### **`end_time`** Timestamp

Time the job ended (or was cancelled), if ended

sacct: `End`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.end_time`

#### **`exit_code`** uint64

Job exit code, if ended

sacct: `ExitCode`

slurm: `JOB_INFO.exit_code.return_code`

#### **`sacct`** *SacctData

Data specific to sacct output

### Type: `SacctData`

SacctData are data aggregated by sacct and available if the sampling was done by sacct (as
opposed to via the Slurm REST API).  The fields are named as they are in the sacct output, and
the field documentation is mostly copied from the sacct man page.

#### **`MinCPU`** uint64

Minimum (system + user) CPU time of all tasks in job.

#### **`AllocTRES`** string

Requested resources.  These are the resources allocated to the job/step after the job
started running.

#### **`AveCPU`** uint64

Average (system + user) CPU time of all tasks in job.

#### **`AveDiskRead`** uint64

Average number of kilobytes read by all tasks in job.

#### **`AveDiskWrite`** uint64

Average number of kilobytes written by all tasks in job.

#### **`AveRSS`** uint64

Average resident set size of all tasks in job, in kilobytes.

#### **`AveVMSize`** uint64

Average Virtual Memory size of all tasks in job, in kilobytes.

#### **`ElapsedRaw`** uint64

The job's elapsed time in seconds.

#### **`SystemCPU`** uint64

The amount of system CPU time used by the job or job step.

#### **`UserCPU`** uint64

The amount of user CPU time used by the job or job step.

#### **`MaxRSS`** uint64

Maximum resident set size of all tasks in job, in kilobytes.

#### **`MaxVMSize`** uint64

Maximum Virtual Memory size of all tasks in job, in kilobytes.

### Type: `ClusterEnvelope`

On clusters that have centralized cluster management (eg Slurm), the Cluster data reveal
information about the cluster as a whole that are not derivable from data about individual nodes
or jobs.

JSON representation can be read with ConsumeJSONCluster().

#### **`meta`** MetadataObject

Information about the producer and data format

#### **`data`** *ClusterData

Node data, for successful probes

#### **`errors`** []ErrorObject

Error information, for unsuccessful probes

### Type: `ClusterData`

Cluster data, for successful cluster probes

#### **`type`** DataType

Data tag: The value "cluster"

#### **`attributes`** ClusterAttributes

The cluster data themselves

### Type: `ClusterAttributes`

Cluster description.

NOTE: All clusters are assumed to have some unmanaged jobs.

#### **`time`** Timestamp

Time the current data were obtained

#### **`cluster`** Hostname

The canonical cluster name

#### **`slurm`** bool

The `slurm` attribute is true if at least some nodes are under Slurm management.

#### **`partitions`** []ClusterPartition

Descriptions of the partitions on the cluster

#### **`nodes`** []ClusterNodes

Descriptions of the managed nodes on the cluster

### Type: `ClusterPartition`

A Partition has a unique name and some nodes.  Nodes may be in multiple partitions.

#### **`name`** NonemptyString

Partition name

#### **`nodes`** []NodeRange

Nodes in the partition

### Type: `ClusterNodes`

A managed node is always on some state.  A node may be multiple states, in cluster-dependent
ways (some of them really are "flags" on more general states); we expose as many as possible.

NOTE: Node state depends on the cluster type.  For Slurm, see sinfo(1), it's a long list.

#### **`names`** []NodeRange

Constraint: The array of names may not be empty

#### **`states`** []string

The state(s) of the nodes in the range.  This is the output of sinfo as for the
StateComplete specifier, split into individual states, and the state names are always folded
to upper case.

### Type: `NodeRange`

A NodeRange is a nonempty-string representing a list of hostnames compactly using a simple
syntax: brackets introduce a list of individual numbered nodes and ranges, these are expanded to
yield a list of node names.  For example, `c[1-3,5]-[2-4].fox` yields `c1-2.fox`, `c1-3.fox`,
`c1-4.fox`, `c2-2.fox`, `c2-3.fox`, `c2-4.fox`, `c3-2.fox`, `c3-3.fox`, `c3-4.fox`, `c5-2.fox`,
`c5-3.fox`, `c5-4.fox`.  In a valid range, the first number is no greater than the second
number, and numbers are not repeated.  (The motivation for this feature is that some clusters
have very many nodes and that they group well this way.)

## Slurm Job ID structure

For an array job, the Job ID has the following structure.  When the job is submitted, the job is
assigned an ID, call it J.  The task at each array index K then has the structure J_K.  However,
that is for display purposes.  Underneath, each task is assigned an individual job ID T. My test
job 1467073 with steps, 1, 3, 5, 7, have IDs that are displayed as 1467073_1, 1467073_3, and so
on.  Importantly those jobs have underlying "true" IDs 1467074, 1467075, and so on (not
necessarily densely packed, I expect).

Within the job itself the SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID is 1467073 and the SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID is 1, 3, 5,
7, but in addition, the SLURM_JOB_ID is 1467074, 1467075, and so on.

Each of the underlying jobs can themselves have steps.  So there is a record (exposed at least
by sacct) that is called 1467073_1.extern, for that step.

In the data above, we want the job_id to be the "true" underlying ID, the step to be the "true"
job's step, and the array properties to additionally be set when it is an array job.  Hence for
1467073_1.extern we want job_id=1467074, job_step=extern, array_job_id=1467073, and
array_task_id=1.  Here's how we can get that with sacct:

	$ sacct --user ec-larstha -P -o User,JobID,JobIDRaw
	User        JobID             JobIDRaw
	ec-larstha  1467073_1         1467074
	            1467073_1.batch   1467074.batch
	            1467073_1.extern  1467074.extern
	            1467073_1.0       1467074.0
	ec-larstha  1467073_3         1467075
	            1467073_3.batch   1467075.batch
	            1467073_3.extern  1467075.extern
	            1467073_3.0       1467075.0

For heterogenous ("het") jobs, the situation is somewhat similar to array jobs, here's one with
two groups:

	$ sacct --user ec-larstha -P -o User,JobID,JobIDRaw
	User        JobID               JobIDRaw
	ec-larstha  1467921+0           1467921
	            1467921+0.batch     1467921.batch
	            1467921+0.extern    1467921.extern
	            1467921+0.0         1467921.0
	ec-larstha  1467921+1           1467922
	            1467921+1.extern    1467922.extern
	            1467921+1.0         1467922.0

The second hetjob gets its own raw Job ID 1467922.  (Weirdly, so far as I've seen this ID is not
properly exposed in the environment variables that the job sees.  Indeed there seems to be no
way to distinguish from environment variables which hetgroup the job is in.  But this could have
something to do with how I run the jobs, het jobs are fairly involved.)

For jobs with job steps (multiple srun lines in the batch script but nothing else fancy), we get
this:

	$ sacct --user ec-larstha -P -o User,JobID,JobIDRaw
	User        JobID           JobIDRaw
	ec-larstha  1470478         1470478
	            1470478.batch   1470478.batch
	            1470478.extern  1470478.extern
	            1470478.0       1470478.0
	            1470478.1       1470478.1
	            1470478.2       1470478.2

which is consistent with the previous cases, the step ID follows the . of the JobID or JobIDRaw.

## The meaning of a Job ID

The job ID is complicated.

We will assume that on a cluster where at least some jobs are controlled by Slurm there is a
single Slurm instance that maintains an increasing job ID for all Slurm jobs and that job IDs
are never recycled (I've heard from admins that things break if one does that, though see
below).  Hence when a job is a Slurm job its job ID identifies any event stream belonging to the
job, no matter when it was collected or what node it ran on, as belonging, and allows those
streams to be merged into a coherent job view.  To do this, all we need to note in the job
record is that it came from a Slurm job.

However, there are non-Slurm jobs (even on Slurm clusters, due to the existence of non-Slurm
nodes and due to other activity worthy of tracking even on Slurm nodes).  The job IDs for these
jobs are collected from their process group IDs, per Posix, and the monitoring component will
collect the data for the processes that belong to the same job on a given node into the same Job
record.  On that node only, the data records for the same job make up the job's event stream.
There are no inter-node jobs of this kind.  However, process group IDs may conflict with Slurm
IDs and it is important to ensure that the records are not confused with each other.

To make this more complicated still, non-Slurm IDs can be reused within a single node.  The
reuse can happen over the long term, when the OS process IDs (and hence the process group IDs)
wrap around, or over the short term, when a machine is rebooted, runs a job, then is rebooted
again, runs another job, and so on (may be a typical pattern for a VM or container, or unstable
nodes).

The monitoring data expose job, epoch, node, and time.  The epoch is a representation of the
node's boot time.  These fields work together as follows (for non-Slurm jobs).  Consider two
records A and B. If A.job != B.job or A.node != B.node or A.epoch != B.epoch then they belong to
different jobs.  Otherwise, we collect all records in which those three fields are the same and
sort them by time.  If B follows A in the timeline and B.time - A.time > t then A and B are in
different jobs (one ends with A and the next starts with B).

A suitable value for t is probably on the order of a few hours, TBD.  Linux has a process ID
space typically around 4e6. Some systems running very many jobs (though not usually HPC systems)
can wrap around pids in a matter of days.  We want t to be shorter than the shortest plausible
wraparound time.

## Rolled-up samples

The ability to "roll up" processes / samples that are "the same" - that is, to pre-aggregate data
on the sending side - is a data-compression feature that significantly reduces data volume for
typical HPC jobs where a great number of MPI ranks per node are "the same" in the appropriate
sense.  The precise conditions on processes that are aggregated are that they:

  - must be under control of a batch system
  - must have the same non-zero batch system Job ID
  - must have the same command string
  - must have the same parent process
  - must have no child processes (i.e., only leaves are rolled up)

Rolling-up only happens if the appropriate flag is passed to Sonar.

The requirement that the rolled-up processes have the same parent process means that there can be
several rolled-up records with the same Job ID and command name at the same timestamp at a given
node; the records are distinguished by their ParentPid.

The feature does not come without downsides.  Information about individual processes on the same
node is lost, so intra-node imbalance is harder to diagnose, and resident memory figures can
become especially skewed (the shared code is accounted for multiple times).  In general,
postprocessing becomes harder because the data invariants are subtle and special cases and
synthesized IDs have to be introduced.  Also, process filtering in Sonar is performed on the
aggregated data, which can be confusing - the individual processes in an aggregate may all be
insignificant, but the aggregation may still be transmitted.

It is possible that simply applying standard data compression on the sending side would be
equally effective and not have any of the downsides.

